---
Author: Bradford J. Rodriguez
GENERATOR: Mozilla/3.01Gold (Win95; U) \[Netscape\]
title: "Moving Forth: Part 6"
---

# MOVING FORTH {#moving-forth align="CENTER"}

## Part 6: the Z80 high-level kernel {#part-6-the-z80-high-level-kernel align="CENTER"}

### by Brad Rodriguez {#by-brad-rodriguez align="CENTER"}

This article first appeared in [The Computer
Journal](http://www.psyber.com/~tcj) #69 (September/October 1994).

## ERRATA

There are two goofs in the CAMEL80.AZM file I presented in TCJ#67. The
minor goof is that the name length specified in the HEAD macro for the
Forth word **\>** was incorrectly typed as 2 instead of 1.

The major goof results from a subtlety of CP/M console I/O. KEY must not
echo the typed character, and so used BDOS function 6. KEY? used BDOS
function 11 to test non-destructively for the presence of a keypress.
Unfortunately, BDOS function 6 does not \"clear\" the keypress detected
by function 11! I have now rewritten KEY? to use BDOS function 6 (see
[Listing 1](camel80.txt)). Since this is a \"destructive\" test, I had
to add logic to save the \"consumed\" keypress and return it when KEY is
next used. This new logic can be used whenever your hardware (or
operating system) provides only a destructive test-for-keypress.

## HIGH LEVEL DEFINITIONS

In the last installment I did not expound greatly on the source code.
Each Forth \"primitive\" performs a miniscule, sharply-defined function.
It was almost all Z80 assembler code, and if it wasn\'t obvious *why* a
particular word was included, I hope it was clear *what* each word did.

In this installment I have no such luxury: I will present the high level
definitions which embody the elegant (and tortuous) logic of the Forth
language. Entire books have been written \[1,2,3\] describing Forth
kernels, and if you want complete mastery I highly recommend you buy one
of them. For TCJ I\'ll limit myself to some of the key words of the
compiler and interpreter, given in [Listing 2](camel80h.txt).

## TEXT INTERPRETER OPERATION

The text or \"outer\" interpreter is the Forth code which accepts input
from the keyboard and performs the desired Forth operations. (This is
distinct from the address or \"inner\" interpreter, NEXT, which executes
compiled threaded code.) The best way to understand it is to work
through the startup of the Forth system.

1\. The CP/M entry point (see [listing](camel80.txt) in previous
installment) determines the top of available memory, set the stack
pointers (PSP,RSP) and user pointer (UP), establishing the memory map
shown in [Figure 1](#FIGURE1). It then sets the \"inner\" interpreter
pointer (IP) to execute the Forth word **COLD**.

2\. **COLD** initializes the user variables from a startup table, and
then does **ABORT**. (**COLD** will also attempt to execute a Forth
command from the CP/M command line.)

3\. **ABORT** resets the parameter stack pointer and does **QUIT**.

4\. **QUIT** resets the return stack pointer, loop stack pointer, and
interpret state, and then begins to interpret Forth commands. (The name
is apt because **QUIT** can be used to abort an application and get back
to the \"top level\" of Forth. Unlike **ABORT**, **QUIT** will leave the
parameter stack contents alone.) **QUIT** is an infinite loop which will
**ACCEPT** a line from the keyboard, and then **INTERPRET** it as Forth
commands. When not compiling, **QUIT** will prompt \"ok\" after each
line.

5\. **INTERPRET** is an almost verbatim translation of the algorithm
given in section 3.4 of the ANS Forth document. It parses one
space-delimited string from the input, and tries to **FIND** the Forth
word of that name. If the word is found, it will be either executed (if
it is an IMMEDIATE word, or if in the \"interpret\" state, STATE=0) or
compiled into the dictionary (if in the \"compile\" state, STATE\<\>0).
If not found, Forth attempts to convert the string as a number. If
successful, **LITERAL** will either place it on the parameter stack (if
in \"interpret\" state) or compile it as an in-line literal value (if in
\"compile\" state). If not a Forth word and not a valid number, the
string is typed, an error message is displayed, and the interpreter
**ABORT**s. This process is repeated, string by string, until the end of
the input line is reached.

## THE FORTH DICTIONARY

Whoa! How does the interpreter \"find\" a Forth word by name? Answer:
Forth keeps a \"dictionary\" of the names of all Forth words. Each name
is connected in some fashion with the executable code for the
corresponding word.

There are many ways to store a set of strings for searching: a simple
array, a linked list, a multiple linked list, hash table, etc. Almost
all are valid here \-- all Forth asks is that, if you reuse a name, the
*latest* definition is found when you search the dictionary.

It\'s also possible to have several sets of names (\"vocabularies\", or
\"wordlists\" in the new ANSI jargon ). This lets you reuse a name
*without* losing its previous meaning. For example, you could have an
integer **+**, a floating-point **+**, even a **+** for strings\...one
way to achieve the \"operator overloading\" so beloved by the
object-oriented community.

Each string may be connected with its executable code by being
physically adjacent in memory \-- i.e., the name appears in memory just
before the executable code, thus being called the \"head\" or \"header\"
of the Forth word. Or the strings may be located in a totally different
part of memory, and connected with pointers to executable code
(\"separate heads\").

You can even have unnamed (\"headless\") fragments of Forth code, if you
*know* you\'ll never need to compile or interpret them. ANSI only
requires that the ANS Forth words be findable.

The design decisions could fill another article. Suffice it to say that
CamelForth uses the simplest scheme: a single linked list, with the
header located just before the executable code. No vocabularies\...
although I may add them in a future issue of TCJ.

## HEADER STRUCTURE ([FIGURE 2](#FIGURE2))

Still more design decisions: what data should be present in the header,
and how should it be stored?

The minimum data is the name, precedence bit, and pointer (explicit or
implicit) to executable code. For simplicity, CamelForth stores the name
as a \"counted string\" (one byte of length, followed by N characters).
Early Forth Inc. products stored a length but only the first three
characters, for faster comparisons (the actual improvement gained is
another hot debate). Fig-Forth compromised, flagging the last character
with MSB high in order to allow either full-length or truncated names.
Other Forths have used packed strings \[4\], and I suspect even C-style
null-terminated strings have been used.

The \"precedence bit\" is a flag which indicates if this word has
IMMEDIATE status. IMMEDIATE words are executed *even during
compilation*, which is how Forth implements compiler directives and
control structres. There are other ways to distinguish compiler
directives \-- Pygmy Forth \[5\], for example, puts them in a separate
vocabulary. But ANS Forth essentially mandates the use of a precedence
bit \[6\]. Many Forths store this bit in the \"length\" byte. I have
chosen to put it in a separate byte, in order to use the \"normal\"
string operators on word names (e.g. **S=** within **FIND**, and
**TYPE** within **WORDS**).

If the names are kept in a linked list, there must be a link. Usually
the latest word is at the head of the linked list, and the link points
to a previous word. This enforces the ANSI (and traditional) requirement
for redefined words. Charles Curley \[7\] has studied the placement of
the link field, and found that the compiler can be made significantly
faster if the link field comes *before* the name (rather than after, as
was done in Fig-Forth).

[Figure 2](#FIGURE2) shows the structure of the CamelForth word header,
and the Fig-Forth, F83, and Pygmy Forth headers for comparison. The
\"view\" vield of F83 and Pygmy is an example of other useful
information which can be stored in the Forth word header.

Remember: it\'s important to distinguish the header from the \"body\"
(executable part) of the word. They need not be stored together. The
header is only used during compilation and interpretation, and a
\"purely executable\" Forth application could dispense with headers
entirely. However, headers must be present \-- at least for the ANSI
word set \-- for it to be a legal ANS Forth System.

When \"compiling\" a Forth system from assembler source code, you can
define macros to build this header (see HEAD and IMMED in CAMEL80.AZM).
In the Forth environment the header, *and the Code Field*, is
constructed by the word **CREATE**.

## COMPILER OPERATION

We now know enough to understand the Forth compiler. The word **:**
starts a new high-level definition, by creating a header for the word
(**CREATE**), changing its Code Field to \"docolon\" (**!COLON**), and
switching to compile state (**\]**). Recall that, in compile state,
every word encountered by the text interpreter is compiled into the
dictionary instead of being executed. This will continue until the word
**;** is encountered. Being an IMMEDIATE word, **;** will execute,
compiling an **EXIT** to end the definition, and then switching back to
interpret state (**\[**).

Also, **:** will **HIDE** the new word, and **;** will **REVEAL** it (by
setting and clearing the \"smudge\" bit in the name). This is to allow a
Forth word to be redefined in terms of its \"prior self\". To force a
recursive call to the word being defined, use **RECURSE**.

Thus we see that there is no distinct Forth \"compiler\", in the same
sense that we would speak of a C or Pascal compiler. The Forth compiler
is embodied in the actions of various Forth words. This makes it easy
for you to change or extend the compiler, but makes it difficult to
create a Forth application *without* a built-in compiler!

## THE DEPENDENCY WORD SET

Most of the remaining high-level words are either a) necessary to
implement the compiler and interpreter, or b) provided solely for your
programming pleasure. But there is one set which deserves special
mention: the words I have separated into the file CAMEL80D.AZM ([Listing
3](camel80d.txt)).

One of the goals of the ANSI Forth Standard was to hide CPU and model
dependencies (Direct or Indirect Threaded? 16 or 32 bit?) from the
application programmer. Several words were added to the Standard for
this purpose. I have taken this one step further, attempting to
encapsulate these dependencies *even within the kernel*. Ideally, the
high-level Forth code in the file CAMEL80H.AZM should be the same for
all CamelForth targets (although different assemblers will have
different syntax).

Differences in cell size and word alignment are managed by the ANS Forth
words **ALIGN ALIGNED CELL+ CELLS CHAR+ CHARS** and my own addition,
**CELL** (equivalent to **1 CELLS**, but smaller when compiled).

The words **COMPILE, !CF ,CF !COLON** and **,EXIT** hide peculiarities
of the threading model, such as a) how are the threads represented, and
b) how is the Code Field implemented? The value of these words becomes
evident when you look at the differences between the direct-threaded Z80
and the subroutine-threaded 8051:

     
     word     compiles on Z80   compiles on 8051

     COMPILE, address           LCALL address
     !CF      CALL address      LCALL address
     ,CF      !CF & allot       3 bytes !CF & allot 3 bytes
     !COLON   CALL docolon      nothing!
     ,EXIT    address of EXIT   RET

(**!CF** and **,CF** are different for indirect-threaded Forths.)

In similar fashion, the words **,BRANCH ,DEST** and **!DEST** hide the
implementation of high-level branch and loop operators. I have tried to
invent \-- without borrowing from existing Forths! \-- the minimal set
of operators which can factor out all the implementation differences.
Only time, expert criticism, and many CamelForths will tell how
successful I\'ve been.

So far I have *not* been successful factoring the differences in header
structure into a similar set of words. The words **FIND** and **CREATE**
are so intimately involved with the header contents that I haven\'t yet
found suitable subfactors. I have made a start, with the words
**NFA\>LFA NFA\>CFA IMMED? HIDE REVEAL** and the ANS Forth words
**\>BODY IMMEDIATE**. I\'ll continue to work on this. Fortunately, it is
practical for the time being to use the identical header structure on
all CamelForth implementations (since they\'re all byte-addressed 16-bit
Forths).

## NEXT TIME\...

I will probably present the 8051 kernel, and talk about how the Forth
compiler and interpreter are modified for Harvard architectures
(computers that have logically distinct memories for Code and Data, like
the 8051). For the 8051 I will print the files CAMEL51 and CAMEL51D, but
probably only excerpts from CAMEL51H, since (except for formatting of
the assembler file) the high-level code shouldn\'t be different from
what I\'ve presented this issue\...and Bill needs the space for other
articles! Don\'t worry, the full code will be uploaded to GEnie.

*However,* I may succumb to demands of Scroungemaster II builders, and
publish the 6809 CamelForth configured for the Scroungemaster II board.
Whichever I do next, I\'ll do the other just one installment later.

## REFERENCES

1\. Derick, Mitch and Baker, Linda, [Forth Encyclopedia]{.underline},
Mountain View Press, Route 2 Box 429, La Honda, CA 94020 USA (1982).
Word-by-word description of Fig-Forth.

2\. Ting, C. H., [Systems Guide to fig-Forth]{.underline}, Offete
Enterprises, 1306 South B Street, San Mateo, CA 94402 USA (1981).

3\. Ting, C. H., [Inside F83]{.underline}, Offete Enterprises (1986).

4\. Ewing, Martin S., [The Caltech Forth Manual]{.underline}, a
Technical Report of the Owens Valley Radio Observatory (1978). This
PDP-11 Forth stored a length, four characters, and a link in two 16-bit
words.

5\. Sergeant, Frank, [Pygmy Forth for the IBM PC]{.underline}, version
1.4 (1992). Distributed by the author, available from the Forth Interest
Group (P.O. Box 2154, Oakland CA 94621 USA) or on GEnie.

6\. J. E. Thomas examined this issue thoroughly when converting Pygmy
Forth to an ANSI Forth. No matter what tricks you play with relinking
words, strict ANSI compliance is violated. A regrettable decision on the
part of the ANS Forth team.

7\. In private communication.

The source code for Z80 CamelForth is *now* available on GEnie as
CAMEL80.ARC in the CP/M and Forth Roundtables. Really. I just uploaded
it. (Apologies to those who have been waiting.)

*Source code for Z80 CamelForth is available on this site at
<http://www.camelforth.com/public_ftp/cam80-12.zip>.*

## []{#FIGURE1}FIGURE 1. Z80 CP/M CAMELFORTH MEMORY MAP

assuming CP/M BDOS starts at ED00 hex.

    0000 +-----------------------+
         |      CP/M stuff       |
    0080 +-----------------------+
         | Terminal Input Buffer |
         |                       |
    0100 +-----------------------+
         |                       |
         | CamelForth Z80 kernel |
         |                       |
    1700 +-----------------------+
         | User definitions      |
         |                       |
         |                       |   / EB00 reserved     
         ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  /  EB02 >IN          
         |                       | /   EB04 BASE         
    EB00 +-----------------------+/    EB06 STATE        
         | User Area             |     EB08 DP           
         |                       |\    EB0A,EB0C 'SOURCE
         |                       | \   EB0E LATEST       
         |       Parameter Stack |  \  EB10 HP           
    EC00 +-----------------------+   \ EB12 LP           
         |                       |
         |   HOLD working buffer |
    EC28 +-----------------------+
         | PAD buffer            |
         |                       |
    EC80 +-----------------------+
         | Leave stack*          |
         |                       |
         |                       |
         |          Return stack |
    ED00 +-----------------------+
         |                       |
         |         CP/M          |
         |                       |
    FFFF +-----------------------+

\* used during compilation of DO..LOOPs.

## []{#FIGURE2}FIGURE 2. HEADER STRUCTURES

        CamelForth        Fig-Forth          Pygmy Forth            F83
                                                            
     D7           D0    D7           D0    D7           D0    D7           D0
    +---------------+  +-+-+-+---------+  +---------------+  +---------------+
    |               |  |1|P|S| length  |  |               |  |               |
    |-    link     -|  +-+-+-+---------+  |-    view     -|  |-    view     -|
    |               |  |               |  |               |  |               |
    +-------------+-+  |-    name     -|  +---------------+  +---------------+
    |      0      |P|  |               |  |               |  |               |
    +-+-----------+-+  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  |-    link     -|  |-    link     -|
    |S|   length    |  |               |  |               |  |               |
    +-+-------------+  +-+            -|  +-+-+-+---------+  +-+-+-+---------+
    |               |  |1|             |  |0|0|S| length  |  |1|P|S| length  |
    |-    name     -|  +-+-------------+  +-+-+-+---------+  +-+-+-+---------+
    |               |  |               |  |               |  |               |
    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  |-    link     -|  |-    name     -|  |-    name     -|
    |               |  |               |  |               |  |               |
    |-             -|  +---------------+  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
    |               |                     |               |  |               |
    +---------------+                     |-             -|  +-+            -|
                                          |               |  |1|             |
                                          +---------------+  +-+-------------+

**Link** - in CamelForth and Fig-Forth, points to the previous word\'s
Length byte. In Pygmy Forth and F83, points to the previous word\'s
Link.

**P** - Precedence bit, equals 1 for an IMMEDIATE word (not used in
Pygmy).

**S** - Smudge bit, used to prevent FIND from finding this word.

**1** - in Fig-Forth and F83, the length byte and the last character of
the name are flagged with a 1 in the most significant bit (bit 7).

**View** - in Pygmy Forth and F83, contains the block number of the
source code for this word.

[Continue with Part 7](moving7.htm) \| [Back to publications
page](index.html)
